Split DELIVERY_TIMEOUT into two types of timeout (#1605)
moq-wg/moq-transport: draft-ietf-moq-transport.md

the middle of the range (eg: 128) to allow non-default priorities to be
set either higher or lower.

> # Delivery Timeouts and Data Reliability {#timeouts}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Delivery Timeouts and Data Reliability {#delivery-timeouts}
```

Each MOQT subscription has two timeout values associated with it: a
SUBGROUP_DELIVERY_TIMEOUT and an OBJECT_DELIVERY_TIMEOUT.  Both of those values
are expressed in milliseconds; both are optional; a value of 0 means that
there is no timeout set.

The publisher communicates both timeout values as a Track Property; the

> subscriber communicates them as a Message Parameter.  For each type of timeout,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
subscriber communicates them as Message Parameters.  For each type of timeout,
```

if both the publisher and the subscriber have a non-zero value, the smaller of
the two is used.

If the OBJECT_DELIVERY_TIMEOUT is not zero, the MOQT implementation MUST retain
the time at which the first byte of every object has been either received from
the upstream subscription, or provided by the original publisher application.
The actual mechanism by which the timeout works depends on the Object
Forwarding Preference:

- For subgroups, the implementation MUST check the time elapsed since the first

>   byte of the object before attempting to send it; if the time elapsed exceeds

Reviewer 2: Do we need to say something about retransmissions?  If the first TX happens before ODT but loss is detected after, the publisher can, MAY, SHOULD, MUST NOT reset?

Author: Good question!  I assume that most QUIC stacks don't really expose that information, so I am not sure what to say about that.

Reviewer 2: I think we should explicitly permit cancellation of retransmissions after delivery timeout, and even suggest that is optimal:

> Optimal implementations will also prevent retransmitting object data its delivery timeout has expired.

Reviewer: MAY is probably pragmatic.  Or SHOULD if you support it?

  OBJECT_DELIVERY_TIMEOUT, it MUST reset the underlying transport stream with
  the reset stream code DELIVERY_TIMEOUT (see {{closing-subgroup-streams}}) and
  SHOULD NOT attempt to open a new stream to deliver additional Objects in that
  Subgroup.  In order for this timeout mechanism to be efficient, the
  implementations SHOULD limit the amount of data buffered at the underlying

>   transport layer.

Reviewer 2: Do you mean "effective" rather than "efficient"?  And if so, more elaboration about why limiting the buffering makes the timeout more effective?

Author: "Effective" is probably better.

>   transport layer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Subgroup.  Optimal implementations will evaluate the subgroup's delivery timeout
  as late as possible, after any internal queuing.
```

- For datagrams, the implementation MUST drop the datagrams if the time elapsed
  since the first byte exceeds OBJECT_DELIVERY_TIMEOUT.  Similar to subgroups,
  implementations SHOULD either minimize datagram queueing, or use datagram
  queueing mechanisms that support time bounds (such as the `outgoingMaxAge`

>   parameter in the W3C WebTransport API).

Reviewer 2: I think it makes more sense to say - drop the datagram at the lowest possible layer -- preferably by passing the timeout value down.  The references to queuing muddles things because queues don't have a relationship to timeouts?

Author: Well, at least in WebTransport, datagram queues have timeouts associated with them.  If your stack defers datagram queueing to the application, you'd have to deal with that check yourself.

Reviewer: Given Webtransport supports this, it seems like a reasonable example.

Reviewer 2: Why don't streams have an "outgoingMaxAge" parameter -- e.g. all this queueing business is a band-aid over having deadline aware transports.  I recognize those aren't common.

It seems to implement either of these mechanisms, transports need to provide some callback when "transport buffers/queues are available".

This is all to say I prefer to keep the advice high level -- check the timeouts as late as you can.  That might mean delaying passing available objects to the underlying transport, which has other tradeoffs.

Author: > Why don't streams have an "outgoingMaxAge" parameter -- e.g. all this queueing business is a band-aid over having deadline aware transports. I recognize those aren't common.

Datagrams are atomic application units, streams bytes are not, thus the difference; for contrast, SCTP is message-based, and [it has that feature too](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/RTCDataChannel/maxPacketLifeTime).  Streams themselves are atomic, but since we give you an object to access a stream, you can reset it yourself. 

> This is all to say I prefer to keep the advice high level -- check the timeouts as late as you can. That might mean delaying passing available objects to the underlying transport, which has other tradeoffs.

I can see that this would not apply to implementation that don't have datagram queues.  The advice given here is a practicality.

>   since the first byte exceeds OBJECT_DELIVERY_TIMEOUT.  Similar to subgroups,
>   implementations SHOULD either minimize datagram queueing, or use datagram
>   queueing mechanisms that support time bounds (such as the `outgoingMaxAge`
>   parameter in the W3C WebTransport API).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  since the first byte exceeds OBJECT_DELIVERY_TIMEOUT.  
  Optimal implementations will evaluate the datagram's delivery timeout
  as late as possible before sending, after any internal queuing.
```

If the Object Forwarding Preference is Subgroup and the value of
SUBGROUP_DELIVERY_TIMEOUT is not zero, once the MOQT implementation becomes
aware that all of the objects on the subgroup have been published (either by
receiving a FIN from the upstream subscription, or, in case of the original
publisher, through being notified of this fact by the application), it MUST

> start a timer that will reset the underlying subgroup stream after

Reviewer: In implementation, one can typically avoid using a timer, so saying MUST her feels odd.

Author: I think you actually have to, but sure, I'll remove the timer mention.

the middle of the range (eg: 128) to allow non-default priorities to be
set either higher or lower.

# Delivery Timeouts and Data Reliability {#delivery-timeouts}

Each MOQT subscription has two timeout values associated with it: a
SUBGROUP_DELIVERY_TIMEOUT and an OBJECT_DELIVERY_TIMEOUT.  Both of those values
are expressed in milliseconds; both are optional; a value of 0 means that
there is no timeout set.

The publisher communicates both timeout values as a Track Property; the
subscriber communicates them as Message Parameters.  For each type of timeout,
if both the publisher and the subscriber have a non-zero value, the smaller of
the two is used.

If the OBJECT_DELIVERY_TIMEOUT is not zero, the MOQT implementation MUST retain

> the time at which the first byte of every object has been either received from

Reviewer 2: Is this header byte or payload byte?

Author: Let's go with payload, since it's easier to define.

the upstream subscription, or provided by the original publisher application.
The actual mechanism by which the timeout works depends on the Object
Forwarding Preference:

- For subgroups, the implementation MUST check the time elapsed since the first

>   byte of the object before attempting to send it; if the time elapsed exceeds

Reviewer 2: "send it" -> passing it to the underlying transport for transmission?

  OBJECT_DELIVERY_TIMEOUT, it MUST reset the underlying transport stream with
  the reset stream code DELIVERY_TIMEOUT (see {{closing-subgroup-streams}}) and
  SHOULD NOT attempt to open a new stream to deliver additional Objects in that
  Subgroup.  This SHOULD apply to retransmissions if the underlying transport

>   implementation allows.  If not, in order for this timeout mechanism to be

Reviewer 2: The timeout should be re-checked before retransmitting an object if the underlying transport allows

  effective, the implementations SHOULD limit the amount of data buffered at

>   the underlying transport.

Reviewer 2: I'm still tripping on this buffering comment.  Maybe adding some explanation like:

Any delay between the timeout check and transmission of the object can result in delivering expired data.  If the underlying transport buffers or queues data before transmission, the implementation SHOULD limit the amount of data buffered there.

That said, there's a tension with priority vs delivery timeout -- if I've buffered only low-pri data, and higher-pri data arrives, should I pass it to the underlying transport immediately, or should I wait until transport space becomes availaible?

Author: Added the explanation.

> That said, there's a tension with priority vs delivery timeout -- if I've buffered only low-pri data, and higher-pri data arrives, should I pass it to the underlying transport immediately, or should I wait until transport space becomes availaible?

What would waiting give you?  At least in our implementation, the buffer is per-stream, meaning that you don't get anything from waiting.

Reviewer 2: What you get from delaying is a later delivery timeout check.  In any case, it feels like you've written all of this with your particular implementation in mind, and it's not generalizing.

- For datagrams, the implementation MUST drop the datagrams if the time elapsed
  since the first byte exceeds OBJECT_DELIVERY_TIMEOUT.  Similar to subgroups,
  implementations SHOULD either minimize datagram queueing, or use datagram
  queueing mechanisms that support time bounds (such as the `outgoingMaxAge`
  parameter in the W3C WebTransport API).

If the Object Forwarding Preference is Subgroup and the value of
SUBGROUP_DELIVERY_TIMEOUT is not zero, once the MOQT implementation becomes
aware that all of the objects on the subgroup have been published (either by
receiving a FIN from the upstream subscription, or, in case of the original
publisher, through being notified of this fact by the application), it MUST
reset the underlying subgroup stream after SUBGROUP_DELIVERY_TIMEOUT elapses.
The subgroup timeout timer MUST remain active until the underlying transport
stream reaches "all data committed" state ({{!I-D.ietf-webtrans-overview,
Section 4.3}}); this ensures that MOQT can time out subgroups where all of the
data has been sent, but the stream has not been fully closed due to the packet
loss.

For objects with Object Forwarding Preference set to Datagram, the

> SUBGROUP_DELIVERY_TIMEOUT acts the same way as OBJECT_DELIVERY_TIMEOUT; if both

Reviewer: This is weird because it SUBGROUP_DELIVERY_TIMEOUT would be the end of the Subgroup has been received, but OBJECT_DELIVERY_TIMEOUT is the beginning of the Object.  My intuition is that it would be from when the end of the Object in the Datagram is received.

Reviewer 2: For datagram, doesn't the beginning and the end necessarily have to be the same time?

the negotiated DELIVERY TIMEOUT, subject to stream closure and ordering
constraints described in {{closing-subgroup-streams}}.  However, if neither the
subscriber nor publisher specifies DELIVERY TIMEOUT, all Objects in the track
matching the subscription filter are delivered as indicated by their Group Order
and Priority.  If a subscriber fails to consume Objects at a sufficient rate,
causing the publisher to exceed its resource limits, the publisher MAY terminate
the subscription using PUBLISH_DONE with error `TOO_FAR_BEHIND`.

If an object in a subgroup exceeds the delivery timeout, the publisher MUST
reset the underlying transport stream (see {{closing-subgroup-streams}}) and
SHOULD NOT attempt to open a new stream to deliver additional Objects in that
Subgroup.

This parameter is intended to be specific to a
subscription, so it SHOULD NOT be forwarded upstream by a relay that intends
to serve multiple subscriptions for the same track.

Publishers SHOULD consider whether the entire Object can likely be
successfully delivered within the timeout period before sending any data
for that Object, taking into account priorities, congestion control, and

> any other relevant information.

Reviewer 2: Was the removal of this intentional?  I think we still want it
